---
title: Docusaurus Problems
tags: [web, dev, Docusaurus]
---

Day 1 of using Docusaurus and I'm already pretty disappointed in it. Maybe someone knows how to solve these problems, but online searches and Docusaurus's own documentation has yet to turn up solutions.

<!-- truncate -->

## Problems

-   impossible to disable the dynamic tab title

    Docusaurus produces funky titles (like the title being duplicated) to the point where I've set the title and delimiter to empty strings.

-   recommended search behavior requires a backend

    Third party plugins provide offline searching.

-   _some_ dark mode CSS var overrides require `!important`

-   impossible to disable or customize many features (like "previous", "next" buttons, archive page title, etc.)

    workaround: hide them with custom styles

-   it's strangely slow

    My work's big web app dev server starts in ~300ms. Docusaurus's dev server takes 3.5 seconds to start, even without any blog posts at all.

-   customization is hard

    For example, there's no `index.html` page. I have to insert custom HTML with JavaScript properties in the Docusaurus config file.

-   `docusaurus start` on-change reloads don't actually propagate changes to the website half the time
-   it automatically transforms date strings from markdown file names into a URL with slashes between each date part (like `2024-05-27-my-post.md` gets turned into `/2024/05/27/my-post`), but each path part is not a valid page. (Meaning, `/2024/05/` does not exist.)

    I worked around this by adding my own post processor that reverts the slashes back into dashes in my Docusaurus config [here](https://github.com/electrovir/my-blog/blob/b85d12f32225617a90fd4a54425828bbf9cb48fa/docusaurus.config.ts#L37-L52).

## Benefits

-   syntax highlighting in code blocks
    ```typescript
    export const myVar = 'string value';
    ```
-   RSS/Atom/JSON feed generated by default

## Conclusion

Docusaurus is good enough for now. However, the next time I've got a blank slate (when does that even happen?) I'll roll my own solution.
